In a much earlier lecture, we introduced the
notion of roll, pitch, yaw angles. It’s
an intuitive way to think about the orientation
of a body in space and we can think about
it as the product of a number of elementary
rotations. It’s a rotation around the x-axis
by the roll angle, a rotation around the y-axis
by the pitch angle, and a rotation around
the z-axis by the yaw angle.
Now, we could take the derivative of this
expression and we obtain a relationship for
the rate of change of the rotation matrix
in terms of some elementary rotation matrices.
The derivatives of some elementary rotation
matrices, and the derivative of the roll angle,
pitch angle and yaw angle which are here denoted
by r dot, p dot and y dot, respectively.
We also know that the time derivative of a
rotation matrix can be expressed in terms
of a skew-symmetric matrix which is a function
of angular velocity and the rotation matrix
itself. I can rearrange this rather complex
expression and so for the skew-symmetric matrix,
s. And then, I can equate the finite elements
of s between the left and right hand side
of my equation.
The result is a relationship between angular
velocity, omega, and the rates of change of
my roll, pitch and yaw angles. And, this relationship
is in terms of yet another Jacobian matrix.
It’s a 3 x 3 Jacobian matrix and is denoted
by the symbol capital B. B is a function of
the roll, pitch, yaw angles. And, more precisely,
it’s a function of the roll angle and the
pitch angle. The yaw angle does not appear
in the expression for this Jacobian matrix.
This is a nice relationship because it links
a very obscure and abstract quantity like
angular velocity and expresses it in terms
of roll, pitch and yaw rates which are much
more intuitive for engineers.
Here is the expression that we introduced
earlier which maps the rate of change of robot
joint angles to the robot end effector spatial
velocity. The spatial velocity, as we know,
comprises two components: the translational
component and a rotational component expressed
here as an angular velocity vector.
What we'd like to do is to redefine this spatial
velocity vector so that the rotational part
now contains the roll, pitch and yaw rates
of change. If we are going to do that, then
we need to change our definition of the Jacobian
matrix itself. So, we introduce a variant
of the Jacobian matrix called JA and that
is the analytic Jacobian matrix and it relates
the change in robot joint angles to spatial
velocity defined now with roll, pitch and
yaw angle rates.
To obtain the analytic Jacobian, we start
with the standard robot manipulator Jacobian
matrix and we pre-multiply it by this matrix,
contains a lot of 1s and 0s and it also contains
the inverse of the 3 x 3 Jacobian matrix B.
B is a function of the roll, pitch, yaw angles
which I denote by the symbol capital Gamma.